Exploring Categorical Variables

Categorical Variable
Frequency Table / Bar plot

Relative frequencies instead of counts on the y axis

How are bar plots different?
Used for categorical. histogram is for numerical

x-axis on histogram is number line ordering of bars not interchangeable


 Contingency Table

Relative Frequencies
Consider column

Associated variables (dependent)


Segmented bar plot
Visualising two categorical variables
Frequencies = counts. Not relative frequencies

In order to explore relationship you need a visualisation of relative frequencies

Mosaic plot
Use contingency tables and segmented bar plots or mosaic plots to assess the relationship between two categorical variables.

Marginal distribution - width of the bars

Side-by-side box plots

Relationship between numerical and categorical variable



Introduction to inference

Two competing claims

Promotion and gender are independent - null hypothesis

There is something going on - dependent - alternative hypothesis

‘Fail to reject the null hypothesis’ - never declare it to true

Burden of proof is on the alternative hypothesis


Hypothesis testing framework
start with a null hypothesis
alternative hypothesis
conduct a hypothesis test
if test suggests no convincing evidence for alternative, stick with null
if they do, go with alternative

simulation scheme


Difference between simulated rates. We can compare variance of the test to the distribution of differences here.

Build a distribution of simulated differences



Making a decision

If results from simulations look like the data, we conclude the variables are independent.

If results do not look like data, we can conclude the data provide evidence of a dependency for the variables

0 = null value


Summary
Null and alternative hypothesis
Simulate the experiment
Evaluated the probability at least as extreme as the one observed in the original data
Probability was low so we rejected the null hypothesis in favour of the alternative

p-value : probability of observing an outcome…




Reading Notes
focus on the conceptual meaning of the standard deviation as a descriptor of variability rather than the formulas. usually 70% will be within one standard deviation and 95% will be within two.

The dataset with the most repeated observations has the least variability, hence the lowest standard deviation.
