Variables
Numerical (quantitative)
Categorical (qualitative)

Numerical
Continuous - infinite values within a given range. Height
Discrete - specific set of numeric values. Count - e.g. cars


Categorical
Ordinal - levels have inherent ordering, e.g good, very good
Regular Categorical - e.g. morning or afternoon person

When two variables show a connection, they’re called associated (dependent)

Association can be described as positive or negative.

If not associated, they are independent.

Observational Studies

Observation: Doesn’t interfere with how the data arise
Only establish an association, or correlation
Past data is a retrospective
Throughout the study, it’s prospective


Experiment
Randomly assign users 
Establish causal connection
Imposed by the researcher


Extraneous variables that affect both the explanatory and response variable, are called confounding variables.



Sampling & Sources of Data

Explanatory Analysis for the sample at hand
inference - concluding on the population
For inference needs to be valid, sample needs to be representative

Convenience Sample - easily accessible, more likely to be included
Non-response - if only a non-random fraction of the randomly sample people respond to a survey
Voluntary response -occurs when sample consists people who volunteer to respond as they have strong opinions on the issue

Voluntary - no initial random sample
Non-response - randomly sampled but non-random fraction of the sample


Sampling Methods


Simple Random Sample
Randomly select cases from the population

Stratified Sampling
Divide the population into homogenous groups called strata then sample within each stratum

Cluster Sample
Population Clusters, sample a few clusters. Clusters are heterogeneous and similar to another.

Multistage Sample
Divide the population clusters
Randomly sample a few clusters
then sample within these clusters


Experimental Design

Control
Compare treatment to control

Randomise
Randomly assign subject to treatments

Replicate

Block
Block for pro status - divide the sample and assign to groups


Blocking vs explanatory variables (factors)
Factors - we can impose them
Blocking - characteristics that the units come with

Blocking is like stratifying. Blocking during assignment, stratifying during sampling


Placebo - fake treatment

Blinding - don’t know which experiment they’re in
Double-blind - both units and researchers don’t know the group assignment

Random Sample Assignment

Random Sampling - 

Random Assignment - only in experimental settings
Random assignment allows for causality


Random Sampling - randomly select from the population

Random Assignment - randomly assign to groups
