Visualising Numerical Data

Scatterplots
Relationship between two variables
Identify the explanatory variable - which one impacts the other

income as explanatory (X)
Life expectancy as the response (Y)

Doesn’t guarantee a causal relationship

Strong relationship - not too much scatter


Evaluating the relationship
Direction of relationship - increasing or decreasing
Shape of relationship - linear or curved
Strength - strong with little scatter. Weak with lots of scatter
Potential outliers - individual observations or a group. Investigate to ensure they’re not errors

Naive way - is to exclude outliers


Histogram

Visualising distribution of a variable
Binned into intervals
Heights represent the number of cases
View of data density
Higher data = view is more common
Useful for shape of the distribution

Skewness
Distributions are skewed to the side of the long tail
Symmetric if no skew
Left
Right

Modality
Unimodal - one prominent peak (bell curve)
Bimodal - two prominent peaks
Uniform - no peak
Multimodal More than two peaks

Bimodal - two groups of data

Uniform - no apparent trend in the data

Imagine a smooth curve (like shape)

Bin width can alter the story. Two wide - we lose detail. Two narrow, difficult to get a picture of the distribution.

Dotplot
Useful when individual values of interest
Can get too busy

Boxplot 
Useful for highlighting outliers
Shows median and interquartile range

Determine skewness from box plot - imagine the histogram. Peak will be around the median and tail out from the box plot.

Intensity map
Useful for highlighting the spatial distribution



Measures of Centre

Center of the distribution
Mean = average
Median = midpoint (50th percentile)
Mode = most frequent observation

Sample statistics - point estimates for the unknown population parameters

 Median - average of the middle of the two observations if no exact midpoint

Longtail left - average is being pulled to the left by the long tail on the left.


Skewness vs measures of center

Left skewed
mean < median

Symmetric
mean = median

Right skewed 
mean > median





Measures of Spread

Range: Difference between max and min

Variance average squared deviation from the mean

Standard Deviation

Interquartile Range

Variance:
(first - the mean)^2+(next - the mean)^2 and so on until last one
divided by sample size minus one

Variance is ^2

Why square the differences?
Get rid of negatives so that negatives and positives don’t cancel each other when added together

Increases larger deviations more than smaller ones so they are weighed more heavily


Standard deviation
Average deviation around the mean calculated as the square roots of the variance

Formula is just the square root of the variation


Variability vs Diversity


Distributions where more observations are clustered around the centre are less variable.


Interquartile range
range of the middle 50% of the data. distance between the first and the third quartile.

IQR = Q3 - Q1

IQR more reliable than range is that it doesn’t rely on end points which could be potential outliers



Robust Statistics

Extreme observations have little effect


Center: Robust median. Non-robust: mean
Spread: IQR, non-robust; SD, range

non-robust for symmetric
robust for skewed



Transforming Data

Rescaling data using a function
When data are skewed we transform to make easier to model


Natural log transformation
When much of the data cluster near zero and all observations are positive

Log transformation
make relationship between variables more linear and easier to model with simple methods


Square root transformation

Inverse divide one by variable

Goals of transformations

See data structure differently
Reduce skew assist in modelling
Straighten a nonlinear relationship in scatterplot
